# 4.1.1 Scroll Overview

With over $200M TVL, Scroll is a leading Layer 2 (L2) network in [Ethereum’s scaling ecosystem](https://l2beat.com/scaling/summary). While some Ethereum L2s including Optimism, Arbitrum, and Base use an “Optimistic Rollup” structure, Scroll is a security-focused Zero Knowledge Rollup. Specifically, Scroll publishes all transactions to Ethereum; the “zkEVM” publishes cryptographic proofs that the Scroll network is following the rules of Ethereum. The net **end** result of this architecture is a 90% transaction cost reduction versus Ethereum mainnet, while also achieving full Ethereum compatibility and strong Ethereum ecosystem alignment. Scroll’s zkEVM not only offers scalability to the Ethereum network, but its ZK proofs also enable privacy-preserving capabilities. Zero-knowledge works by enabling one party to demonstrate the truth of a statement to another party; this is accomplished \*without\* disclosing any additional information. It only offers proof of the validity of the statement. This architecture offers a degree of privacy and security that other rollup structures (e.g. Optimistic) can’t offer at the protocol level.

Scroll’s application [ecosystem](https://scroll.io/ecosystem) is large and growing. Some of crypto’s largest apps by total value locked (TVL) and daily active users (DAUs) have deployed their apps on Scroll, including Aave, Lido, Compound, Uniswap, and more. There are over 300 projects deployed on Scroll mainnet, with over 6M [unique wallet addresses](https://scrollscan.com/chart/address) ready to interact with these applications. Some of the [largest apps](https://defillama.com/chain/scroll) by TVL on Scroll include EtherFi, Aave, and Stargate Finance.

\
Developer activity is also healthy and growing. There are currently 649 full-time developers (ranking 8th in the wider crypto ecosystem).
