# 4.2 Historical Examples of L2 Strategic Governance Initiatives

We previously looked at case studies from various sectors within crypto: AMMs and governance marketplaces to index product protocols to lending markets and stablecoins. When looking for ways to leverage Scroll to make proposals to other communities, it helps to look at other past examples of Ethereum L2 strategic governance initiatives.

## Optimism & Aave

In a [cross-ecosystem initiative from 2022](https://gov.optimism.io/t/gf-phase-0-proposal-aave/1712), a proposal was posted to the Optimism governance forums, requesting that the DAO distributes OP tokens to the Aave Grants DAO to help grow both the lending protocol and the L2 network. The proposal consisted of four main components:

**Focused Rationale**: The author highlighted Aave’s status as a non-custodial liquidity market protocol, provided the context around Aave v3’s deployment on Optimism Mainnet, and gave TVL figures to highlight its level of adoption. The rationale clearly stated the goal of this proposal: to explain how the 300K OP grant would catalyze growth on Aave and within the Optimism Ecosystem.

**Clear Distribution Mechanism**: Following a governance vote and approval, the distribution of the OP tokens would be sent to the Aave Grants DAO. The Grants DAO would then decide how to funnel the OP toward building in the Optimism Ecosystem, with 2/3rds going toward builders and 1/3rd to Optimism ecosystem-focused events. The post then went into detail describing how the 200K OP would be used for builder rewards and how the 100K would facilitate events (Aave Grants sponsored events, hackathon prizes, etc.).

**Aligned Incentives**: The author went on to highlight how this 200K/100K OP grant distribution would incentivize users after the incentives dry up, highlighting a commitment to sticky liquidity and long-term value creation. He mentioned that the grant would improve Aave on OP, thus bringing more users to both the lending protocol and the L2 network. &#x20;

**Timelines and co-incentives**: The OP grant would be distributed over a period of 6-12 months depending on OP price, and events/sponsoring would happen over the course of 6 months. The Aave Grants DAO demonstrated a commitment of $6M budget to match the Optimism DAO’s commitment of 300K OP tokens.&#x20;

\
Note the concise, focused nature of the grant request. It turned out to be successful. A user posted an [update](https://gov.optimism.io/t/update-on-aaves-op-allocation-from-op-stimpack-phase-0/5904) in the Optimism forums in April 2023 to inform the community on how the grant was used; it led to a [TEMP CHECK](https://governance.aave.com/t/temp-check-allocation-of-300k-op-received-by-aave-grants-dao/12820?u=0xbilll) on the Aave forums which sought the community’s approval on an updated distribution plan for the OP tokens. They proposed using up to 100,000 OP for immediate initiatives and holding the remaining \~200,000 OP in the AGD multisig for future grant rounds. This approach was motivated by a desire to stretch the funding over multiple seasons; at then-current market prices, 300k OP could support Aave Grants for several quarters, so reserving a portion would ensure sustained support for Optimism-based projects. The post’s associated[ Snapshot](https://snapshot.box/#/s:aavedao.eth/proposal/0xe9ff93315d1ce1ee0fe746a3074b866566de096cf912d45350f35e4fe019f502) passed with an overwhelming 99.8% approval rate.

\
However, things didn't go to plan. While the AGD was claiming the tokens, they were erroneously sent to the Aave Guardians Safe wallet. An [Aave Request for Comment (ARFC)](https://governance.aave.com/t/arfc-return-op-to-aave-grants-dao-safe/14139) was then proposed and passed governance to send the tokens to the correct AGD Safe. Later on, an Optimism [grants accountability report (late 2023)](https://gov.optimism.io/t/op-grants-through-season-2-where-has-the-op-gone/4025/27?u=jackanorak) revealed that the majority of the 300,000 OP remained unspent for quite some time. The report specified that nearly 290K OP was still held by Aave’s wallet over a year after distribution. Only a small fraction (\~10k OP) had been disbursed by that point. Some OP went out as hackathon prizes or builder grants (e.g. \~8k OP to a Polynomial Labs multisig, presumably as a builder reward). It concluded that Aave is indeed using the grant as intended, albeit “extremely slowly.” This slow rollout aligns with Aave’s stated plan to be diligent and support the Optimism ecosystem over the long term rather than rushing through the funds.

\
Unfortunately, the Aave Grants DAO faced challenges sustaining its mandate, and in mid-2024, it [announced](https://governance.aave.com/t/update-from-aave-grants-winding-down-agd-1-0-and-what-s-next/18707) a wind-down of AGD “1.0.” After funding over 250 teams since its inception, AGD concluded that a new approach was needed for ecosystem grants, and the current program would cease operations. In January of this year, the AGD’s lead published a[ detailed forum update](https://governance.aave.com/t/reflecting-on-agd-s-journey-and-next-steps/20792) outlining that “the last outstanding task is to distribute the remaining treasury.” This included \~259K remaining OP tokens. The author explicitly encouraged the community to propose a path forward for reallocating the remaining AGD funds in order to conclude the wind-down. Following that update, in February, a [proposal](https://governance.aave.com/t/arfc-proposal-to-allocate-agd-treasury-to-aave-dao/20897) was introduced by the Aave Chan Initiative (ACI), seeking to formally reallocate all remaining AGD treasury assets to the Aave DAO’s treasury; the DAO could then decide how best to utilize them in the future. The proposal [passed](https://snapshot.box/#/s:aavedao.eth/proposal/0x1c0f3a4966a2af2fa39439d078ab8359a316b9a0d799c4abb046530624206abd) the governance process in mid-February with 100% community buy-in.&#x20;

\
This decision marked the formal resolution of how to handle the OP tokens after AGD’s disbandment. Instead of creating a new grants committee or immediately spending the OP on incentives, the community chose the route of reabsorbing the tokens into the main DAO treasury. The OP tokens were  then effectively remained available for any future initiatives decided by governance.&#x20;

\
One of the main takeaways of this strategic governance initiative is that these processes are complex. They can span multiple months, even years; they can necessitate multiple governance proposals and forum posts across both ecosystems; and they don’t always evolve as planned. This is especially true for large Ethereum L2 governance initiatives. It also highlights the importance of regular reporting and community transparency; without insight into how these funds were used or its opsec challenges, the community could lose trust in the DAO’s ability to manage and distribute funds.

## Scroll & Uniswap

\
Let’s look at a lighter-weight, Scroll-specific historical example. In late 2022, Scroll [proposed](https://gov.uniswap.org/t/temperature-check-deploy-uniswap-v3-on-scroll/18114) deploying Uniswap v3 on its network to advance Uniswap’s multichain mission. The team highlighted that adding Uniswap would bring high-throughput, low-fee trading to Scroll and help Uniswap “capture the zkEVM market” early. As noted in previous examples, the proposal led with its shared value creation and the incentive alignment between the two DAOs. Both projects aim to build open, decentralized financial infrastructure, and this proposal included tangible benefits for users (e.g. lower gas costs) and developers (new native L2 DEX use-cases).

In terms of the implementation plan, rather than seeking token funding, the Scroll proposal was a straightforward technical collaboration. Upon Uniswap governance approval, the Scroll Foundation would deploy the standard v3 contracts on Scroll’s testnet and then on mainnet. The proposal explicitly stated that “since we are fully compatible with EVM, it is effortless to deploy on Scroll” and anticipated that the full deployment would only take 2-3 weeks.&#x20;

Both DAOs stood to gain from this partnership. Scroll would immediately have an industry-leading DEX on its network (complementing other DeFi protocols already building there), while Uniswap would access a new user base on an emerging L2. Delegates noted that officially recognizing one Uniswap instance per L2 is important for competition and diversity; similar support for deployments on zkSync and Polygon zkEVM made this decision rather straight-forward. In effect, the collaboration meant more builders and traders would be incentivized to use Uniswap on Scroll’s network, and the Scroll’s community and education efforts would feed user-flow into Uniswap pools.

The governance process unfolded over many months. In December 2022, the[ Snapshot proposal](https://snapshot.box/#/s:uniswapgovernance.eth/proposal/0x5ad7208d9ccad93dbc96abc12bfeffcfe83e96b9782e5135727cdaaf494d70f3) for deployment on Scroll’s testnet passed its Temp Check and the team shortly after[ updated the community](https://gov.uniswap.org/t/temperature-check-deploy-uniswap-v3-on-scroll/18114/205?u=boardroom) with the deployment’s progress. In July 2023, Scroll then published a[ formal RFC](https://gov.uniswap.org/t/rfc-deploy-uniswap-v3-on-scroll/21651) requesting Uniswap DAO approval to make Scroll’s forthcoming mainnet deployment canonical. On the point of relationship-building early in a proposal’s lifecycle, Scroll worked with[ Michigan Blockchain](https://x.com/UMichBlockchain) as the proposal’s official delegate sponsor. This led to a Uniswap[ Temp Check vote](https://snapshot.box/#/s:uniswapgovernance.eth/proposal/0xc874c15656ac985df2f34d4438f8d074226f10408dd74f08295227974179b2c1) in August 2023 and, following Scroll’s mainnet launch in October, a subsequent[ onchain Uniswap proposal](https://www.tally.xyz/gov/uniswap/proposal/52?chart=0) in early November. Shortly after, Uniswap’s front-ends and tooling were updated to include Scroll, and the protocol on Scroll became one more canonical instance of Uniswap v3.&#x20;

In this case of L2 strategic governance, unlike the Aave <> Optimism example, there were no major surprises, no misrouted tokens, no emergencies, and no wind-downs. Even with a relatively smooth governance process, this whole timeline spanned a full calendar year, requiring multiple coordination steps and proposals. It involved multiple “temperature check” votes and discussion periods, a formal RFC, a delegate sponsorship and relationship-building, and an onchain vote – all across two DAOs. Clear communication was key (Scroll kept the community updated at each stage) and the process highlighted that aligning incentives and maintaining transparency (e.g. publishing contract addresses) helped build trust among the communities. It also exemplified the importance of following external DAOs’ governance procedures and how strategic governance among Ethereum L2 DAOs can be achieved in an efficient, relatively seamless and streamlined manner. None of this would have worked had the Scroll team not thoroughly researched how Uniswap’s governance process worked, or had they not adhered to Uniswap’s standard proposal format.&#x20;
